# taxiDataProject

Purpose of the Project
Yellow Cabs have become synonymous with New York City. Though struggling with the onslaught on new entrants from shared ride services, New York Yellow Cabs remain an immensely convenient and accessible means of transportation in a city of 8 million inhabitants. This project will examine the raw data associated with Yellow Cabs in New York from the perspective of a cab driver. Given the 130 million rows of data, how can a cab driver parse usable information without getting lost in a forest of data? This project seeks to provide cab driver with useable information to maximize their tipping profits and maximize their days to provide the highest profitability possible in a city inundated with competition.
Overview of Data
The data on Yellow Cab trips was obtained from https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page, a New York City organization dedicated to tracking cab data for various purposes that are outlined in the above link. For more granular analysis, the data is divided into the 12 months of the year. After combining all the data sets, the Taxi Zone Lookup Table was added to the combined data file to provide borough and neighborhood information for each pickup and dropoff location. Without the inner joined table, the pickup and dropoff locations would be simple numeric identifiers.
After this inner join, the taxiCabData2018 variable was created, but 130 million rows were far too onerous for the group’s systems to work with in a quick and reliable manner. Use sample_n of 1,000,000 rows from each month, a 12 million row data set entitled nycTaxiData2018 was created. To further enhance usability further, this new dataset of 12 million was converted into a tibble, with the datetime columns separated into date and time (by seconds). After the tibble creation, work began on the cleaning of the data.
Data Dictionary for Columns
To better understand the data set, it’s important to follow the data dictionary and variables the group decided were important to the success of the project. Accordingly, the following link: https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/data_dictionary_trip_records_yellow.pdf details the column names and their descriptions. Nothing was edited from the source material except for the following: tpep_pick_datetime and tpep_dropoff_datetime were changed divided into Pickup_Date/Pickup_Time and Dropoff_Date/Dropoff_Time. The _date variables are formatted as dates in format of yyyymmdd. The times are in hms format in seconds, which were converted into minutes for the purposes of analysis. In addition, Pickup_Location_ID and Dropoff_Location_ID were divided into PULocationID, PU_Borough, PU_Neighbourhood, and PU_ServiceZone. The Borough and Neighborhood provide character variables with the name of the boroughs and neighborhoods in NYC.
